**The LHCb collaboration has released data from Run 1 of the LHC to the public
for the first time, allowing research to be conducted by anyone in the world**

<center>
<img src="/static/docs/lhcb-releases-first-set-of-data-2022/CERN-EX-1107175-01.jpg" width="70%" align="middle">
<br><em>LHCb event display from 2011 showing a B meson decaying into a muon and antimuon pair (Image: CERN)</em>
</center>

The [Large Hadron Collider Beauty](https://home.cern/science/experiments/lhcb)
(LHCb) experiment at CERN is the world’s leading experiment in quark flavour
physics with a broad particle physics programme. Its data from Runs 1 and 2 of
the [Large Hadron
Collider](https://home.cern/science/accelerators/large-hadron-collider) (LHC)
has so far been used for over 600 scientific publications, including a number
of significant discoveries. While all scientific results from the LHCb
collaboration are already publicly available through open access papers, the
data used by the researchers to produce these results is now accessible to
anyone in the world through the CERN [open data
portal](/search?page=1&size=20&experiment=LHCb&subtype=Collision&type=Dataset).
The data release is made in the context of CERN’s [Open Science
Policy](https://home.cern/news/news/knowledge-sharing/cern-publishes-comprehensive-open-science-policy),
reflecting the values of transparency and international collaboration enshrined
in the CERN Convention for more than 60 years.

“The data collected at LHCb is a unique legacy to humanity, especially since no
other experiment covers the region LHCb looks at,” says Sebastian Neubert,
leader of the LHCb open data project. “It has been obtained through a huge
international collaborative effort, which was funded by the public. Therefore
the data belongs to society.”

The data sample made available amounts to 20% of the total data set collected
by the LHCb experiment in 2011 and 2012 during LHC Run 1. It comprises 200
terabytes containing information obtained from proton–proton collision events
filtered and recorded with the detector. The LHCb collaboration has
preprocessed the data by reconstructing experimental signatures, such as the
trajectories of charged particles, from the raw information delivered by its
complex detector system. The data is filtered, classified according to
approximately 300 processes and decays, and made available in the same format
as that used by LHCb physicists.

The analysis of LHC data is a complex and time-consuming exercise. Therefore,
to facilitate the analysis, the samples are accompanied by extensive
documentation and metadata, as well as a glossary explaining several hundred
special terms used in the preprocessing. The data can be analysed using
dedicated LHCb algorithms, which are available as open source software.

The data is suitable for different types of physics studies and can be directly
downloaded by anyone. “It is intended to be used by professional scientists and
its interpretation needs some knowledge of particle physics, but everybody is
invited to give it a try,” continues Neubert. “It would be great if the data
inspires new research directions and is used by researchers in other fields,
such as data science and artificial intelligence. We are eager to hear from
users of the data what they find.”

Further data releases from the LHCb collaboration are planned in the future.
Read more on the [LHCb
website](https://lhcb-outreach.web.cern.ch/2022/12/02/lhcb-data-released-to-the-public/).

The LHCb collaboration would like to thank the CERN [Information
Technology](https://information-technology.web.cern.ch/) department for its
help in making this release available on the CERN open data portal.

<em>Published in <a
href="https://home.cern/news/news/knowledge-sharing/lhcb-releases-first-set-data-public">home.cern/news/news/knowledge-sharing/lhcb-releases-first-set-data-public</a>.</em>
