The JADE experiment was one of the experiments located at the PETRA e+e-
 storage ring at DESY in Hamburg, Germany.  Its scientific 
programme aimed at answering a series of fundamental questions such as:

*   What is the dynamics of the strong interaction that binds quarks inside ordinary matter ? 
You can find more information on the JADE detector and physics on the [JADE website](https://wwwjade.mpp.mpg.de/)

## About JADE History
The JADE experiment was one of the experiments located at the PETRA e+e-
 storage ring at DESY in Hamburg, Germany. The experiment took data 
 between 1979 and 1986 in the center-of-mass range between 14 and 45GeV. 
 Since 1997 a group at the University of Aachen, now located at the MPI 
 in Munich, started to re-analyze the data taken during that time period. 
 New theoretical calculations developed during and after the running of 
 the LEP experiments are applied to the data taken between 14 and 45GeV. 
 This allows a unique access to data at that energy range. 

## About JADE Data

The following are provided through this portal:

*   Primary and derived datasets

    *   The available [primary JADE datasets](FIXME) contain a limited 
    sample of specially selected interaction events recorded from pp 
    and PbPb collisions collected in 2010\. The data format is the ESD 
    (event summary data) format generated by the JADE raw data 
    reconstruction software. These datasets are not statistically 
    representative and therefore cannot be used to perform full fledged 
    scientific studies. They rather serve to demonstrate the use of the 
    JADE analysis tools.
    *   A set of [simplified datasets](FIXME) derived from the primary 
    ones for use in the provided masterclass analyses. These data contain
     exclusively the information needed by the masterclasses and are 
     not useful for a different purpose.
*   [Tools](FIXME)

    *   A downloadable [Virtual Machine (VM)](/docs/jade-virtual-machine) 
    image with the JADE software environment which allows to access the above datasets
    *   An [analysis example chain](/docs/jade-getting-started) running 
    in the VM, reading a primary dataset using the 
    [JADE analysis framework](http://aliweb.cern.ch/Offline/Activities/Analysis/AnalysisFramework/index.html). 
    The sources for the example can be adapted and recompiled by the 
    user to look at different features of JADE data. This exercise 
    requires a minimal understanding of the usage of the analysis framework.
    *   Source code for the various examples and applications used by 
    the [JADE masterclasses](http://jade.physicsmasterclasses.org/MasterClassWebpage.html)

## Primary Datasets formats

Data in the primary datasets are in a format known as 
ESD (Event Summary Data), produce by the 
JADE [reconstruction procedure](http://aliweb.cern.ch/Offline/Activities/Reconstruction/index.html)

*   The Event Summary Data (ESD) contains lists of reconstructed 
tracks/particles and global event properties. ESD files contain the 
information that is needed for the analysis:

    *   All the high-level physics objects (such as muons, electrons, etc.);
    *   Tracks with associated hits, calorimetric clusters with associated
     hits, vertices;
    *   Information about event selection (triggers), data needed for 
    further selection and identification criteria for the physics objects.
*   An ESD file is not the final event interpretation with a simple list 
of particles, but just its best current understanding that takes into 
account several parameters

## Disclaimer

*   The open data are released under the [Creative Commons CC0 waiver](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). Neither JADE nor CERN endorse any works, scientific or otherwise, produced using these data.
*   All released data samples will have a unique DOI that you are requested to cite in any applications or publications.
*   Despite being processed, the high-level primary datasets remain complex and selection criteria need to be applied in order to analyse them, requiring some understanding of particle physics and detector functioning. The data cannot be viewed in simple data tables for spreadsheet-based analyses.
*   JADE had just started data taking in 2010 and the methods are evolving, in particular to respond to the evolving beam conditions of the LHC.
