<center>
<img src="/static/docs/cms-releases-heavy-ion-data/cms_hi_event_1.png" width="80%">
<br/>
</center>

The CMS experiment at CERN has released into the public domain [its first
batches of open data from heavy-ion
collisions](/search?q=&keywords=heavy-ion%20physics&year=2010&year=2011&experiment=CMS) at the
Large Hadron Collider. The two batches contain two datasets from 2010 and four
from 2011, recorded during the LHC’s first data-taking period (“Run 1”), along
with eight sets of reference data from proton–proton collisions recorded at the
same collision energy. The total disk volume of the release is 214&nbsp;TB.

Famous for the proton–proton collisions that resulted in the discovery of the
Higgs boson, the LHC also collides nuclei from heavy elements (heavy ions) for
a few weeks each year, complementing data from proton–proton interactions.
Heavy-ion collisions at the LHC occur at the highest energy achieved in the
laboratory. They can recreate the very early conditions of the universe, when
the quarks and gluons, which are normally bound together to form particles like
protons and neutrons, existed freely in a soup-like state known as a
quark–gluon plasma. Scientists at the LHC can use such collisions to understand
these early-universe conditions and study the interaction of other particles
with the quark–gluon plasma.

In 2010 and 2011, the heavy-ion collisions were between nuclei of lead. Using
these data, CMS could observe several signatures of the quark–gluon
plasma, including the imbalance between the momenta of each jet of particles
produced in a pair, the suppression (“quenching”) of particle jets in
jet–photon pairs and the “melting” of certain composite particles.

CMS has already released 100% of the proton–proton data the collaboration
recorded in 2010 and 2011. Therefore, with the release of the lead–lead data,
all of the data CMS recorded in the first two years of LHC operation is in the
public domain, in accordance with the collaboration’s open-data policy.

Analysing data from the LHC requires specialised software and analysis
environments. CMS is providing these in the form of Virtual Machine images as
well as Docker container images, which come with all the necessary software.
Further, in order for a new data explorer to familiarise themself with the
kinds of analysis one can perform with the data, CMS has also provided usage
examples. Those interested in specific advice can ask for it on the [official
CERN Open Data forum](https://opendata-forum.cern.ch).

“Preparing this release presented unique challenges to CMS,” notes Kati
Lassila-Perini, who has led the CMS Data Preservation and Open Access team
since 2012. “The heavy-ion community on CMS is quite small and a lot of the
knowledge from a decade ago has been difficult to track down. Nevertheless,
thanks to the help of our colleagues, we’re thrilled that we can share these
interesting and valuable datasets with the world.”

Since this is the first release of heavy-ion data from CMS, the collaboration
is looking forward to receiving input and feedback from the wider community of
high-energy physicists.

“We’ve seen with the data we released earlier how useful the feedback from the
open-data users can be, and we will do our best to address eventual
shortcomings reported to us,” adds Lassila-Perini.

As before, all of the CMS open data are released into the public domain under
[the Creative Commons CC0
waiver](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) via [the CERN Open
Data portal](http://opendata.cern.ch/). The portal is openly developed on
GitHub by [the CERN Information Technology
team](http://information-technology.web.cern.ch/) in cooperation with the
experimental collaborations. CMS would like to thank CERN for providing
resources and expertise to build and maintain the portal. We would also like to
acknowledge the continuous effort of many of our collaboration members who have
helped us release this latest batch of CMS open data.
